Add section on using git (#890)
rust-lang/rustc-dev-guide: src/git.md

# Using git

> The Rust project uses [git][git] to manage its source code. In order to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Rust project uses [git] to manage its source code. In order to
```

contribute, you'll need some familiarity with its features so that your changes
can be incorporated into the compiler.

[git]: https://git-scm.com

The goal of this page is to cover some of the more common questions and
problems new contributors face. Although some git basics will be covered here,
if you have never used git or GitHub before you may find that this is still a
little too fast for you. In that case, it would make sense to first read some
introductions to git, such as the Beginner and Getting started sections of
[this tutorial from Atlassian][atlassian-git]. GitHub also provides

> documentation and guides for beginners.
> 
> [atlassian-git]: https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/what-is-version-control

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[documentation] and [guides] for beginners.

[atlassian-git]: https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/what-is-version-control
[documentation]: https://docs.github.com/en/github/getting-started-with-github/set-up-git
[guides]: https://guides.github.com/introduction/git-handbook/
```
You might also recommend https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/; it's a little more in-depth but has great info.

Although this page should get you to a point where you can start contributing,
learning more git is almost certainly a good use of your time if you want to
keep contributing. There are many tutorials online for those folks that are
newer which combine excellently with man pages and official documentation.

## Prequisites

> We'll assume that you've installed git, forked rust-lang/rust, and cloned the
> forked repo to your PC. We'll also use the command line interface to interact
> with git; there are also a number of GUIs and IDE integrations that can
> generally do the same things.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll assume that you've installed git, forked [`rust-lang/rust`], and cloned the
forked repo to your PC. We'll also use the command line interface to interact
with git; there are also a number of GUIs and IDE integrations that can
generally do the same things.

[`rust-lang/rust`]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/

```

If you've cloned your fork, then you will be able to reference it with `origin`
in your local repo. It may be helpful to also set up a remote for the official
rust-lang/rust repo via

```sh

> git remote add rust git@github.com:rust-lang/rust.git

Reviewer: Let's recommend the HTTPS version first, I expect most contributors won't have an SSH key setup.

Author: I thought I had read somewhere that GH was phasing out password based HTTPS auth. Regardless, you're definitely right that we should make the change now, and then if things do change in the future we can update at the point.

Reviewer: That's for the API, not for git itself. https://docs.github.com/en/rest/overview/other-authentication-methods#via-username-and-password

```

if you're using SSH, or

```sh
git remote add rust https://github.com/rust-lang/rust.git
```

if you're using HTTPS.

## Standard Process

Below is the normal procedure that you're likely to use for most minor changes
and PRs:

 1. Ensure that you're making your changes on top of master:
 `git checkout master`.
 2. Get the latest changes from the Rust repo: `git pull rust master`.
 3. Make a new branch for your change: `git checkout -b issue-12345-fix`.
 4. Make some changes to the repo and test them.
 5. Stage your changes via `git add src/changed/file.rs src/another/change.rs`
 and then commit them with `git commit`. Of course, making intermediate commits
 may be a good idea as well. Avoid `git add .`, as it makes it too easy to

>  unintentionally commit changes that should not be committed. You can use

Reviewer: We've had so much trouble with submodules lol, I think there's some suggestions drifting around to switch to `subtree` it's so bad.
```suggestion
 unintentionally commit changes that should not be committed, such as submodule updates. You can use
```

```
<<<<<<< HEAD
Original code
=======
Your code
>>>>>>> 8fbf656... Commit fixes 12345
```

This represents the lines in the file that git could not figure out how to
rebase. The section between `<<<<<<< HEAD` and `=======` has the code from
master, while the other side has your version of the code. You'll need to
decide how to deal with the conflict. You may want to keep your changes,
keep the changes on master, or combine the two.
 
Generally, resovling the conflict consists of two steps: First, fix the
particular conflict. Edit the file to make the changes you want and remove the
`<<<<<<<`, `=======` and `>>>>>>>` lines in the process. Second, check the
surrounding code. If there was a conflict, its because someone else changed the
same code you did. That means its likely there are some logical errors lying
around too!

Once you're all done fixing the conflicts, you need to stage the files that had
conflicts in them via `git add`. Afterwards, run `git rebase --continue` to let
git know that you've resolved the conflicts and it should finish the rebase.
Finally, once the rebase has succeeded, you'll want to update the associated

> branch on your fork with `git push -f`.

Reviewer: the backticks are weird because github doesn't let me nest them in suggestions
```suggestion
branch on your fork with `git push -f`.

Note that `git push` will not work properly and say something like this:

\```
 ! [rejected]        issue-xxxxx -> issue-xxxxx (non-fast-forward)
error: failed to push some refs to 'https://github.com/username/rust.git'
hint: Updates were rejected because the tip of your current branch is behind
hint: its remote counterpart. Integrate the remote changes (e.g.
hint: 'git pull ...') before pushing again.
hint: See the 'Note about fast-forwards' in 'git push --help' for details.
```

The advice it gives here is incorrect! Because rust has a 'no-merge' policy, running `git pull` will create a merge commit, defeating the point of your rebase. Use `git push -f` instead.
```

## Advanced Rebasing

Sometimes, you may want to perform a more complicated rebase. There are two
common scenarios that might call for this.

If your branch contains multiple consecutive rewrites of the same code, or if
the rebase conflicts are extremely severe, it is possible that just trying to
reapply the changes you made on top of the updated code will be too much of a
headache. In this case, you can use the interactive rebase feature via
`git rebase -i master` to gain more control over the process. This allows you
to choose to skip commits because they represent changes you no longer need,
edit the commits that you do not skip, or change the order in which they are
applied.

The other common scenario is if you are asked to or want to "squash" multiple
commits into each other. The most common example of this is likely if you
forgot to run `x.py tidy` before committing. Your PR will need to be revised,
but a single commit at the end with message "fixup tidy issue" is usually
unhelpful, and it is easier for everyone else if you combine that commit with
another that has a more meaningful commit message. In this case, you'll want to

> run `git rebase -i HEAD~2` to edit the last two commits and merge them

Reviewer: This works for the most recent two commits, but I normally rebase the whole branch while I'm at it.
```suggestion
run `git rebase -i $(git merge-base HEAD master)` to edit your commits and merge them
```
Maybe that's too much for a beginner guide though?

Author: I have not addressed this yet, but I'm also not quite sure how to. A slightly more general approach to this section could indeed be useful, but I don't know how to write it in a way that doesn't sacrifice clarity.

Reviewer: Let's hold off on the more general approach for now, then. I'm planning to add a more 'advanced' section with things like `range-diff` anyway, I think this would be a good fit there.

together. Essentially, this reapplies the last two commits on top of your
current branch; this is of course a no-op, since that is where they are
already. However, by selecting the `-i` option, you give yourself the
opportunity to edit the rebase first, just like before. This way you can
request to have the most recent commit squashed into its parent.

## No-Merge Policy

The rust-lang/rust repo uses what is known as a "rebase workflow." This means
that merge commits in PRs are not accepted. As a result, if you are running

> `git merge` locally, chances are good that you should be rebasing instead. Of
> course, this is not always true; if your merge will just be a fast-forward,
> like the merges that `git pull` usually performs, then no merge commit is
> created and you have nothing to worry about.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`git merge` locally, chances are good that you should be rebasing instead. Of
course, this is not always true; if your merge will just be a fast-forward,
like the merges that `git pull` usually performs, then no merge commit is
created and you have nothing to worry about. Use `git merge --ff-only` to make sure
you don't introduce a merge commit by accident.
```

Author: Even better is running `git config merge.ff only` to enforce this in the entire repo. Will update.

There are a number of reasons for this decision and like all others, it is of
course a tradeoff. The main advantage is the (mostly) linear commit history.

> This greatly simplifies bisecting. TODO: There are other advantages to a rebase

Reviewer: Bisecting is the main one, yeah - rollups make this hard enough, it would be even more painful if the commit log didn't match the order PRs were merged.

encounter at least one "rebase conflict." This happens when git's attempt to
reapply the changes fails because your changes conflicted with other changes
that have been made. You can tell that this happened because you'll see
lines in the output that look like

```
CONFLICT (content): Merge conflict in file.rs
```

When you open these files, you'll see sections of the form

```
<<<<<<< HEAD
Original code
=======
Your code
>>>>>>> 8fbf656... Commit fixes 12345
```

This represents the lines in the file that git could not figure out how to
rebase. The section between `<<<<<<< HEAD` and `=======` has the code from
master, while the other side has your version of the code. You'll need to
decide how to deal with the conflict. You may want to keep your changes,
keep the changes on master, or combine the two.
 
Generally, resovling the conflict consists of two steps: First, fix the
particular conflict. Edit the file to make the changes you want and remove the
`<<<<<<<`, `=======` and `>>>>>>>` lines in the process. Second, check the
surrounding code. If there was a conflict, its because someone else changed the
same code you did. That means its likely there are some logical errors lying

> around too!

Reviewer: Maybe we should suggest `x.py check` too? x.py compiles a lot more than it needs to if you're only working on the library though :/ `x.py check library/std` won't do extra work but also won't check enough if you're working on the compiler itself.

```suggestion
around too! It's a good idea to run `x.py check` here to make sure there are no glaring errors.
```

Once you're all done fixing the conflicts, you need to stage the files that had
conflicts in them via `git add`. Afterwards, run `git rebase --continue` to let
git know that you've resolved the conflicts and it should finish the rebase.
Once the rebase has succeeded, you'll want to update the associated branch on

> your fork with `git push -f`.

Reviewer: Let's use long flags since people won't recognize them.
```suggestion
your fork with `git push --force`.
```

Note that `git push` will not work properly and say something like this:

```
 ! [rejected]        issue-xxxxx -> issue-xxxxx (non-fast-forward)
error: failed to push some refs to 'https://github.com/username/rust.git'
hint: Updates were rejected because the tip of your current branch is behind
hint: its remote counterpart. Integrate the remote changes (e.g.
hint: 'git pull ...') before pushing again.
hint: See the 'Note about fast-forwards' in 'git push --help' for details.
```

The advice this gives is incorrect! Because of the "no-merge" policy, running
`git pull` will create a merge commit, defeating the point of your rebase. Use

> `git push -f` instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`git push --force` instead.
```

## Advanced Rebasing

Sometimes, you may want to perform a more complicated rebase. There are two
common scenarios that might call for this.

If your branch contains multiple consecutive rewrites of the same code, or if
the rebase conflicts are extremely severe, it is possible that just trying to
reapply the changes you made on top of the updated code will be too much of a
headache. In this case, you can use the interactive rebase feature via

> `git rebase -i master` to gain more control over the process. This allows you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`git rebase --interactive master` to gain more control over the process. This allows you
```

to choose to skip commits because they represent changes you no longer need,
edit the commits that you do not skip, or change the order in which they are

> applied.

Reviewer: If things are normally this bad, I normally don't use rebasing at all. Usually this happens because I made a _ton_ of changes or because I unindented a function and git thinks every line conflicts.

For the first one, I give up on keeping the commit history and do something like this:

```
git checkout feature-branch
# squash all the changes into one commit so you only have to worry about conflicts once, not for every commit
git rebase -i $(git merge-base master)  # and squash all changes along the way
git rebase master 
# fix all merge conflicts
git rebase --continue
```

That throws away the history but means you only have to solve conflicts once instead of again and again for every commit. See https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/75756 or https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/74489 for examples of big PRs like this that are hard to rebase.

For the second one, there's usually not many conflicts if you say to ignore whitespace changes: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/24412980/how-to-run-git-rebase-and-ignore-whitespace
That messes up the formatting so you have to run `x.py fmt`, but that's way easier than fixing merge conflicts.

The other common scenario is if you are asked to or want to "squash" multiple
commits into each other. If you PR needs only a minor revision, a single commit
at the end with message "fixup small issue" is usually unhelpful, and it is
easier for everyone if you combine that commit with another that has a more

> meaningful commit message. Run `git rebase -i HEAD~2` to edit the last two

Reviewer: ```suggestion
meaningful commit message. Run `git rebase --interactive HEAD~2` to edit the last two
```

> commits so you can merge them together. By selecting the `-i` option, you give

Reviewer: ```suggestion
commits so you can merge them together. By selecting the `--interactive` option, you give
```

 7. [Open a PR][ghpullrequest] from your fork to rust-lang/rust's master branch.

[ghpullrequest]: https://guides.github.com/activities/forking/#making-a-pull-request

If your reviewer requests changes, the procedure for those changes looks much
the same, with some steps skipped:

 1. Ensure that you're making changes to the most recent version of your code:
 `git checkout issue-12345-fix`.
 2. Make, stage, and commit your additional changes just like before.
 3. Push those changes to your fork: `git push`.

## Conflicts

When you edit your code locally, you are making changes to the version of
rust-lang/rust that existed when you created your feature branch. As such, when
you submit your PR it is possible that some of the changes that have been made
to rust-lang/rust since then are in conflict with the changes you've made.

When this happens, you need to resolve the conflicts before your changes can be
merged. First, get a local copy of the conflicting changes: Checkout your local
master branch with `git checkout master`, then `git pull rust master` to
update it with the most recent changes.

### Rebasing

> You're now ready to start the rebasing process. Check out the branch with your

Reviewer 2: For consistency with elsewhere on this page:

```suggestion
You're now ready to start the rebasing process. Checkout the branch with your
```

particular conflict. Edit the file to make the changes you want and remove the
`<<<<<<<`, `=======` and `>>>>>>>` lines in the process. Second, check the
surrounding code. If there was a conflict, its likely there are some logical
errors lying around too! It's a good idea to run `x.py check` here to make sure
there are no glaring errors.

Once you're all done fixing the conflicts, you need to stage the files that had
conflicts in them via `git add`. Afterwards, run `git rebase --continue` to let
git know that you've resolved the conflicts and it should finish the rebase.
Once the rebase has succeeded, you'll want to update the associated branch on
your fork with `git push --force`.

Note that `git push` will not work properly and say something like this:

```
 ! [rejected]        issue-xxxxx -> issue-xxxxx (non-fast-forward)
error: failed to push some refs to 'https://github.com/username/rust.git'
hint: Updates were rejected because the tip of your current branch is behind
hint: its remote counterpart. Integrate the remote changes (e.g.
hint: 'git pull ...') before pushing again.
hint: See the 'Note about fast-forwards' in 'git push --help' for details.
```

> The advice this gives is incorrect! Because of the "no-merge" policy, running

Reviewer 2: You'll probably want to apply this manually, but perhaps change to something like this?

```suggestion
The advice this gives is incorrect! Because of Rust's ["no-merge" policy](#no-merge-policy), running
```

`git pull` will create a merge commit, defeating the point of your rebase. Use

> `git push --force` instead.

Reviewer 2: We should recommend using `--force-with-lease`, as it won't overwrite new commits that haven't been pulled locally:

```suggestion
`git push --force-with-lease` instead.
```

Reviewer: I didn't know that existed! That's really useful :D

Reviewer 2: Yes, and it's even better with

```
git config --global alias.pushf "push --force-with-lease"
```

which makes it less likely that you do `git push -f` by mistake (instead you use `git pushf`). Maybe we should add that too? (I found it [here](https://stackoverflow.com/a/30567394).)

Author: I'm not going to include this last thing just yet because I'm not quite sure how best to do this in a way that avoids introducing extra complexity. But the `--force-with-lease` thing is certainly right and a good idea.

`git push --force` instead.

## Advanced Rebasing

If your branch contains multiple consecutive rewrites of the same code, or if
the rebase conflicts are extremely severe, you can use
`git rebase --interactive master` to gain more control over the process. This
allows you to choose to skip commits, edit the commits that you do not skip,
change the order in which they are applied, or "squash" them into each other.

Alternatively, you can sacrifice the commit history like this:

```
# squash all the changes into one commit so you only have to worry about conflicts once
git rebase -i $(git merge-base master)  # and squash all changes along the way
git rebase master
# fix all merge conflicts
git rebase --continue
```

"Squashing" commits into each other causes them to be merged into a single
commit. Both the upside and downside of this is that it simplifies the history.
On the one hand, you lose track of the steps in which changes were made, but
the history becomes easier to work with.

You also may want to squash just the last few commits together, possibly
because they only represent "fixups" and not real changes.

> `git rebase --interactive HEAD~2` will allow you to edit the two commits only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, `git rebase --interactive HEAD~2` will allow you to edit the two commits only.
```
